SCENE I. Rome. Before the Capitol.

[The Tomb of Andronic appearing; the Tribunes and Senators aloft.

    Enter, below, SATURNINUS and his Followers on one side, and
    BASSIANUS and his Followers at the other, with drums and
    colours.]

SATURNINUS.

    Noble patricians, patrons of my right,
    Defend the justice of my cause with arms;
    And, countrymen, my loving followers,
    Plead my successive title with your swords:
    I am his first born son that was the last
    That wore the imperial diadem of Rome:
    Then let my father's honours live in me,
    Nor wrong mine age with this indignity.

BASSIANUS.

    Romans,—friends, followers, favourers of my right,—
    If ever Bassianus, Caesar's son,
    Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,
    Keep then this passage to the Capitol;
    And suffer not dishonour to approach
    The imperial seat, to virtue consecrate,
    To justice, continence, and nobility:
    But let desert in pure election shine;
    And, Romans, fight for freedom in your choice.

[Enter MARCUS ANDRONICUS aloft, with the crown.]

MARCUS.

    Princes,—that strive by factions and by friends
    Ambitiously for rule and empery,—
    Know that the people of Rome, for whom we stand
    A special party, have by common voice,
    In election for the Roman empery
    Chosen Andronicus, surnamed Pius
    For many good and great deserts to Rome:
    A nobler man, a braver warrior,
    Lives not this day within the city walls.:
    He by the senate is accited home
    From weary wars against the barbarous Goths;
    That with his sons, a terror to our foes,
    Hath yok'd a nation strong, train'd up in arms.
    Ten years are spent since first he undertook
    This cause of Rome, and chastised with arms
    Our enemies' pride: five times he hath return'd
    Bleeding to Rome, bearing his valiant sons
    In coffins from the field;
    And now at last, laden with honour's spoils,
    Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,
    Renowned Titus, flourishing in arms.
    Let us entreat,—by honour of his name
    Whom worthily you would have now succeed,
    And in the Capitol and senate's right,
    Whom you pretend to honour and adore,—
    That you withdraw you and abate your strength;
    Dismiss your followers, and, as suitors should,
    Plead your deserts in peace and humbleness.

SATURNINUS.

    How fair the tribune speaks to calm my thoughts!

BASSIANUS.

    Marcus Andronicus, so I do affy
    In thy uprightness and integrity,
    And so I love and honour thee and thine,
    Thy noble brother Titus and his sons,
    And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all,
    Gracious Lavinia, Rome's rich ornament,
    That I will here dismiss my loving friends;
    And to my fortunes and the people's favour
    Commit my cause in balance to be weigh'd.

[Exeunt the Followers of BASSIANUS.]

SATURNINUS.

    Friends, that have been thus forward in my right,
    I thank you all and here dismiss you all;
    And to the love and favour of my country
    Commit myself, my person, and the cause.

[Exeunt the Followers of SATURNINUS.]

    Rome, be as just and gracious unto me
    As I am confident and kind to thee.—
    Open the gates, tribunes, and let me in.

BASSIANUS.

    Tribunes, and me, a poor competitor.

[Flourish. Exeunt; SATURNINUS and BASSIANUS go up into the Capitol.]

[Enter a Captain.]

CAPTAIN.

    Romans, make way. The good Andronicus,
    Patron of virtue, Rome's best champion,
    Successful in the battles that he fights,
    With honour and with fortune is return'd
    From where he circumscribed with his sword
    And brought to yoke the enemies of Rome.

[Flourish of trumpets, &c. Enter MARTIUS and MUTIUS; after them two Men bearing a coffin covered with black; then LUCIUS and QUINTUS. After them TITUS ANDRONICUS; and then TAMORA, with ALARBUS, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON, AARON, and other Goths, prisoners; soldiers and People following. The bearers set down the coffin, and TITUS speaks.]

TITUS.

    Hail, Rome, victorious in thy mourning weeds!
    Lo, as the bark that hath discharg'd her fraught
    Returns with precious lading to the bay
    From whence at first she weigh'd her anchorage,
    Cometh Andronicus, bound with laurel boughs,
    To re-salute his country with his tears,—
    Tears of true joy for his return to Rome.—
    Thou great defender of this Capitol,
    Stand gracious to the rites that we intend!—
    Romans, of five and twenty valiant sons,
    Half of the number that King Priam had,
    Behold the poor remains, alive and dead!
    These that survive let Rome reward with love;
    These that I bring unto their latest home,
    With burial amongst their ancestors;
    Here Goths have given me leave to sheathe my sword.
    Titus, unkind, and careless of thine own,
    Why suffer'st thou thy sons, unburied yet,
    To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?—
    Make way to lay them by their brethren.—

[The tomb is opened.] 